




Agile Manifesto

>Through this work we have come to value [...] customer collaboration over contract negotiation

In key 12 principles, principle number 2 says

>Welcome changing requirements, even late in development. Agile processes harness change for the customer's competitive advantage.

The problem that often comes is that custemor's changing requirements means new features, reworking, redisigning etc. That is more work for the workers, and out of scope of the initial agreement (contract), as we were following the "customer collaboration over contract negotiation" rule. Customers/clients tend to get advantage on that point. Of course they will want more for the same money. Who wouldn't. But us, promoting ourselves as naive, just gives them the reason more to do so. Contracts exists for a reason, and all clauses of agreement should be put in it. It should also take "changing requirements" into consideration. It should be put on the table before the clients. It is something to be talkend about. The more experienced negotiators tend to have everything written on any communication platform - be it contract, mail, or skype. When you have it written, you can always reffer to it and say "hey, this is what we agreed, and that is what you have been delievered". Clients do not know what exactly do they want, or how to prioritize their needs. If they make you spend 30% more time on the project, it cannot cost the same. It is simple math. Who pays for that additional 30% (and "why you"). If we are Agile, why should we be stupid?

I think that Agile was revolutionary and forward thinking considering the circumstances in which it was made. It was counter intuitive for the current planning-execution way of doing the job, and it is great what changes it had brought. But now, when it has decentralized what it had to, gave autonomy where it had to, and removed excess formalities, it has done it's job! If we try to go even further with "no importance of documentation", "less negotiation", and "accepting client's changes even in later stages", we will do no one a favour.
