---
layout: post
title: "Collaboration VS Negotiation"
tagline: "Or do they go together"
categories: methodology
#image: /thumbnail-mobile.png
author: "Peter Iron Carbonic"
#meta: "Springfield"
---



Agile Manifesto

>Through this work we have come to value [...] customer collaboration over contract negotiation

In key 12 principles, principle number 2 says

>Welcome changing requirements, even late in development. Agile processes harness change for the customer's competitive advantage.

The problem that often comes is that custemor's changing requirements means new features, reworking, redisigning etc. That is more work for the workers, and out of scope of the initial agreement (contract), as we were following the "customer collaboration over contract negotiation" rule. Customers/clients tend to get advantage on that point. Of course they will want more for the same money. Who wouldn't. But us, promoting ourselves as naive, just gives them the reason more to do so. Contracts exists for a reason, and all clauses of agreement should be put in it. It should also take "changing requirements" into consideration. It should be put on the table before the clients. It is something to be talkend about. The more experienced negotiators tend to have everything written on any communication platform - be it contract, mail, or skype. When you have it written, you can always reffer to it and say "hey, this is what we agreed, and that is what you have been delievered". Clients do not know what exactly do they want, or how to prioritize their needs. If they make you spend 30% more time on the project, it cannot cost the same. It is simple math. Who pays for that additional 30% (and "why you"). If we are Agile, why should we be stupid?

I think that Agile was revolutionary and forward thinking considering the circumstances in which it was made. It was counter intuitive for the current planning-execution way of doing the job, and it is great what changes it had brought. But now, when it has decentralized what it had to, gave autonomy where it had to, and removed excess formalities, it has done it's job! If we try to go even further with "no importance of documentation", "less negotiation", and "accepting client's changes even in later stages", we will do no one a favour.

A small anecdote (that I did not made up).

When we were in the HQ IT departmant, working on "Radar Interuptions and False Alarming" project, the head of our team was 1st Capt. Millers. He was something like a PO in Agile. He said to us: "Men, we were given the opportunity to do something useful for our country. And also get to stay here on safe spot, so listen up! I have agreed all and every foundation of this project, and we know what are we dealing with. Give your best. Stay calm. Write good code. Don't go into too much details when it is not important. War technology is changing fast, so we may need to redirect the project if it comes to (it like making a pivot in Lean development). That is why I will have few of us always research the enemy radar technologies, and stay in weekly or everyday communication with our Intelligence Committee, in order to get possible redirecting causes as early as possible. Be ready for changes, but focus on the core problem with greatest strength! First day we will do nothing regular. I want to hear everyone's idea about how to solve the problem. I want to hear your... Yes private?

pvt. Carbonic: Sir, I was working in a civilian IT company for 6 years before I came here. The things you mention sound much alike Agile and Lean development that we followed in our company.

cpt. Millers: Yes, private. But this is the upgraded version. I call it Strength Methodology. Because it isn't f*g blind, and not a fad. It is bold and true.

pvt. Carbonic: Sir... *khm... With all due respect, Agile methodologies are the synonym of bold (yup, that's what I thought back then)... It pivots, or how do you call it "redirects" when it sees a obstacle that it cannot take down... It respects individuals in their fields of expertise, it makes a small autonomous team that builds itself as it build the product...

cpt Millers: All right... Carbonic. Beleive me, I have not fallen from the tree yesterday. I know how do they work. Tell me, why do 95% of them fail?

pvt. Carbonic: Well... I don't know.

cpt. Millers: Is 5% to succeed enough for us?

pvt. Carbonic: Well, probably people do not implement it right. I saw a lot of missinterpretations. Companies follow Agile selectively. 

cpt. Millers: People think they are smart! They want to be a part of "what's popular". We are not popular. No one will hear about us. It does not matter what people would think if they saw us. We need to finish the job. We need to do it right. We need to be ready for changes. We need to divide the job between us, and to make an estimate about needed time and resources. Call us Agile if you want, but cannot be the 95%. And I do not want to think  that I am smart. We need to be that. Pvt. Carbonic, when you are so smart, shoot: How should we solve the problem.

pvt. Carbonic: Read the field reports daily. Talk with pilots and AA personel weekly. Use first week on research-only for whole team. No code until week 3. Paper, pencil, people talking.

cpt. Millers: Is that Lean? Agile?

pvt. Carbonic: It's something that gives the best chances to prepare the best design which would minimize number of project redirections in mid and later stages, at least from our side.

cpt. Millers: Still a smart guy? Let me see 100 pushups.

pvt. Carbonic: Sir, yes sir.

100 pushups later.

cpt. Millers: Is that enough private?

pvt. Carbonic: Sir, it does not matter. I am right. I can do 10 more, but I will still be right if I fall down.

cpt. Millers: Good joke is always a good argument. At least that's what whaching Senate live has thought me. Let's try what you said.

pvt. Carbonic: Sir, it is not something that changed from your opinion very much.

cpt. Millers: I just wanted to see how you act in "100 pushups" level of stupid situations. You passed.

pvt. Carbonic: Oh... Did I do pushups for nothing.

cpt. Millers: Not nothing... It was amuzing. And also, you are missing the psychology layer. Be content with "good job private". Ok, lunch, break, we start researching and talking in an hour!
